---
layout: page
title: 3.SoS-Notebook-Using-Jupyter
description: "SoS-Notebook-Using-Jupyter"
tags: [tutorial]
modal-id: SoS-Notebook-Using-Jupyter
---


Jupyter notebook is a web application that allows you to create documents with live code and results. The underlying interpreters of the cells are called **kernel**. For example, you can use a `python` kernel to interpret python expressions, or a `ir` kernel to interpret `R` commands. You can use sos within a `python` kernel by loading the `sos_magic` ipython extension, or use a `sos` kernel to create a complete SoS environment. In addition to the ability to execute SoS workflows within Jupyter, the SoS kernel allows you to start subkernels (e.g. `ir`) and switch between the subkernels in the same notebook. That allows you to freely mix code in different languages in the same notebook.

## Installing the SoS kernel

The SoS installation process will install a SoS kernel by default. To verify if you have the sos kernel installed, type

```
$ jupyter kernelspec list
Available kernels:
  python3    /Users/bpeng1/bin/anaconda/lib/python3.5/site-packages/ipykernel/resources
  sos        /usr/local/share/jupyter/kernels/sos
```
and check if you have `sos` listed as one of the kernels. If not, try to re-install SoS using `pip3 install sos --upgrade` or clone SoS locally and run `python setup.py install`. At the end of the installation process, you should see

```
IPython kernel named "sos" is installed.
```

If the kernel is installed, fire Jupyter using command

```
$ jupyter notebook
```

from the `New` button to the top right corner, select `SoS`, and create a SoS notebook.

SoS uses [imagemagick](http://www.imagemagick.org/script/index.php) and python package [`wand`](http://docs.wand-py.org/en/0.4.2/) to preview output files so it is recommended that you install imagemagick.

## Convert a SoS workflow to Jupyter notebook

You can convert an existing SoS script to the `.ipynb` format using command

```
$ sos convert myscript.sos --notebook myscript.ipynb
```

and open the resulting notebook from the web interface. The converter uses lines that starts with `%cell` to split SoS a script into cells in Jupyter notebook.

## Using the SoS kernel

You can enter any SoS expression and statements in a Jupyter notebook but each cell needs to be a valid SoS script. That is to say, 

* You can enter any Python expression and statements. For example, you can write pieces of SoS code

    ```python
    res_path = '/path/to/resource'
    ref_genome = '${res_path}/hg19'
    ```
    and evaluate them.

* You can enter any SoS actions in function or script format. For example, you can execute a shell script using

    ```python
    run:
        echo Reference genome is located at ${ref_genome}
    ```

* You can create markdown cells to document your workflow. These cells are not evaluated by SoS so string interpolations are not available to these cells.

* Enter complete SoS steps with or without headers. Section headers are usually ignored because the cells are executed interactively regardless of the specified step indexes. 

## SOS Magics

In addition to SoS statements, you can use a few SoS magics in Jupyter notebook. They are similar to ipython sos magics but the syntax are a bit different. More specifically,

* `%dict [reset|keys|all]` 

  The `%dict` magic lists or rests the content of SoS dict, using syntax

    ```
    %dict [-a|-all] [-k|--keys] [-r|--reset] [var1] [var2] ...
    ```

    where

    * `var1`, `var2` etc are name of variables. All variables will be displayed if no variable is specified.
    * `-a|-all`: list all dictionary keys, including SoS functions and variables.
    * `-k|--keys`: list only keys, not their values
    * `-r|--reset`: reset the dictionary to its original content (with only SoS internal values)

* `%run [command-options] [workflow-options]`

  The `%sos` magic allows you to specify SoS options such as `-v` (verbosity), `-j` (max number of jobs), and workflow options as defined by `parameter:` keyword.

* `%paste [command-options] [workflow-options]`

  This magic is used only for SoS kernel on a console (e.g. `ipython qtconsole --kernel sos`) where you can grab and execute content from the clipboard.

* `%set [command-options] [workflow-options]`

  The `%set` magic sets a persistent sos options so you do not have to enter them each time after `%run` or `%paste`. For example, if you set `%set -v3`, you can execute all cells in the notebook at verbosity level 3 (`DEBUG`).

* `%matplotlib [GUI]`

  Similar to ipython's `matplotlib` magic, the `%matplotlib inline` magic allows the display of matplotlib figures inline in Jupyter notebook or qtconsole.

* `%use kernel` 
   This magic starts (or switches to) an alternative jupyter kernel to which expanded code (with string interpolation) will be sent. Kernel set by `%use kernel` will be persistent, affecting all subsequent input, including text pasted using magic `%paste`.  

   `kernel` can be any [Jupyter supported kernels](https://github.com/ipython/ipython/wiki/IPython-kernels-for-other-languages). In particular, you can use `ir` for R kernel (alias `R` is also acceptable), `python3` for python3, `iperl` for perl, `bash` for bash. Please refer to [IRKernel](https://github.com/IRkernel/IRkernel) for instructions on how to install the `ir` kernel for `R`.

  `%use` magic accepts parameters `--in (-i)` and `--out (-o)`, which are variables that will be transferred to the subkernel after starting (or switching to) the subkernel, and variables that will be transferred back to SoS before magic `%use sos`. More specifically,

  ```
  %use R -i var1 var2 -o var3
  do_something
  --- (another cell)
  %use sos
  ```  

  is equivalent to

  ```
  %use R
  %get var1 var2
  do_something
  --- (another cell)
  %put var3
  %use sos
  ```  

* `%with kernel`

  `%with kernel` also starts (or switches to) a subkernel, but kernel specified by `%with kernel` will be reset as soon as the cell is executed. This magic is therefore suitable for a quick errand to another kernel. This magic also accepts options `--in` (or `-i`) and `--out` (or `-o`), so you could use

  ```
  %with R -i n -o rn
  rn <- rnorm(n)
  ```

  to get a list of normally distributed numbers using R's `rnorm` function.

* `%restart kernel`

  `%restart` specified kernel without affecting the current working kernel. 

* `%put` (`ir` and `python` kernels only)

    Magics `%put` are used to return results from subkernel to SoS kernel when the current kernel is a subkernel started by magic `%use`. Only the `ir` and `python` kernels are supported now. Whereas there is virtually no limit on exchangeable datatypes between `SoS` and `python` kernels, there are no perfect map between Python (SoS) and `R` datatypes so SoS tries to find the best match between data types. More specifically,
  
  | R  |  length (n) |   Python |
  | --- | --- |---|
  | NULL | |    None |
  | logical |  1 |  boolean |
  | integer |  1 |  integer |
  | numeric |  1 |  double |
  | character |  1 |  unicode |
  | logical |  n > 1 |  list |
  | integer |  n > 1 |  list |
  | numeric |  n > 1 |  list |
  | character |  n > 1 |  list |
  | list without names |  n > 0 |  list |
  | list with names |  n > 0 |  dict |
  | matrix |  n > 0 |  numpy.array |
  | data.frame |  n > 0 |  DataFrame |

* `%get` (`ir` and `python` kernels only)

    Magics `%get` retrieve variables from the SoS to the current subkernel started by magic `%use`. Only the `ir` and `python` kernels are supported now. SoS tries to use the best matching data type for the conversion. More specifically,

  
  | Python  |  cond |   R |
  | --- | --- |---|
  | None | |    NULL |
  | boolean |   | logical |
  | integer |  |  integer |
  | float |  |  float |
  | str |  | character |
  | Sequence (list, tuple, ...) |  homogenous type |  c() |
  | Sequence (list, tuple, ...) |  multiple types |  list |
  | set |  |  list |
  | dictionary |  |  list with names |
  | numpy.ndarray |  | c() array |
  | numpy.matrix |  | matrix |
  | pandas.DataFrame |  |  R data.frame |

  Python objects in other datatypes are transferred as string `"Unsupported datatype"`.

* `!any-shell-command` such as `!ls` and `!pwd`

   If any other command is entered after `!`, sos will treat the rest of the line as a shell command and execute it. Only single-line commands are supported. String interpolation is supported. Most commands are executed in a separate process and have no impact on SoS, except for command `!cd` that changes the current working directory of SoS.

## Convert `.ipynb` files to `.sos`

You can save the notebook to a SoS script using `File` -> `Download As` -> `SoS`, or using command

```
$ sos convert myscript.ipynb --sos myscript.sos
```

The conversion process will strip all results (which can be useful if you would like to version control your notebook without results) but keep cell information and SoS magics. However, **SoS files converted from Jupyter notebook cannot be executed by the `sos` command if they contain SoS magics such as `%use R`** because of non-interactive execution of SoS steps and more rigorous structure required for SoS scripts. You will generally need to 

1. Remove `%` magic from the notebook and replace cells with

    ```
    %with R
      R code
    ```
    to
    ```
    R:
      R code
    ```
    The latter quires the `R code` to be self-contained and does not require definitions from other cells.

2. Add section headers such as `[10]`, and `[human_10]` to the SoS steps if they are executed separately. 

These can be done either in Jupyter notebook or a text editor. Note that Jupyter notebooks converted from a working `.sos` file already have these features so they will work just fine if you convert back from Jupyter notebook, and you can keep your Jupyter notebook executable in batch mode by removing `%` magics after using them for debug, and use section headers for different steps.
