---
layout: default
title: 9.Workflow-Execution
description: "Workflow-Execution"
tags: [documentation]
modal-id: Workflow-Execution
display-order: 9
---

## Specification of workflow or targets

There are two ways to specify a workflow

1. Specify name of a workflow (`sos run script workflow`), this includes the execution of default workflow, single workflow (e.g. `hg18`), subworflow (e.g. `hg18_:100` (up to step 100)), and combined workflows (e.g. `hg18+report`). SoS will execute steps of the specified workflow, in addition to any auxiliary steps that are needed. The **target** of the execution would be the output of the last step of the workflow.

2. Specify targets that needs to be generated (`sos run script -t target`). SoS will construct a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) with auxiliary steps that are need to generate specified targets and execute the graph.

## DAG and Parallel execution

Logically speaking, with command

* Evaluate parameters with either command line input or their default values
* Evaluate the rest of steps in numeric order

Actual execution order depends on step actions, input output options of SoS steps, and option `-j`.
In the sequential execution mode (by default),
all steps are executed one by one with auxiliary steps called when necessary. If a script is written without any step option and
input and output files, it will be executed sequentially even in parallel execution mode (with `-j` option).

If the steps are described with necessary input and output information, steps in SoS workflows can be executed in parallel. The
following figure illustrates the impact input/output options on the execution order of workflows. Note that a step with
unknown `input` (no `input` at present step and no `output` at previous step) can only be executed after all its previous steps
are completed can become bottlenecks of the workflow.

[[{{site.baseurl}}/media/workflow.jpg]]


## Runtime signature

## Removal of intermediate files

## Targets of workflow


## Configuration file

SoS reads a global (`~/.sos/config.yaml`) and a local (`.sos/config.yaml`) configuration files before executing any SoS script. The content of these files are available in the `CONFIG` variable. 

SoS currently support the following configuration variables

* `sos_path` (default to `[]`): A list of directories from which sos will try to locate a script if the script is not in the current directory. For example, if you set `sos_path` to `['~/scripts']`, `sos run myscript.sos` will execute `~/scripts/myscript.sos` if `myscript.sos` does not exist in the current directory. 
* `sos_download_processes` (default to `5`): Number of download processes to download files specified in action `download`.

The default value of 5 for option `sos_download_processes` is usually good enough but you can set it to a larger number if you have enough bandwidthonger time if you are working on a machine with, for example, slow disk access. To change this option, you will need to run

```bash
$ sos config --global --set 'sos_download_processes=10'
```

## `inspect` and `prepare` workflows

## Alternative search path `$PATH`

SoS executes command in the environment the script is executed. 